this is another one of the weaknesses of
the postmodern claim that there's no
Transcendent Unity no meta narrative
which is another which is a restatement
of the idea of the collapse of the
highest the collapse of the unifying
principle the collapse of God the death
of God see one of the real problems with
that hypothesis is
that it's
boundless so there's
no there's no inevitable High Unity okay
at what level of analysis are you
speaking because if I'm going to
perceive this as a glass right then all
of the multitude of things that that
glass is that the different molecular
positions that the liquid inside it
might take all the different ways that a
glass could make itself manifest all
that has to be subsumed into a Unity
that is the glass yes now there's a I
think it's but it might be Monae I don't
remember um French impressionist who
went out and painted hay stacks a whole
series of them under different series
different conditions of Illumination
right and the Haz stack is the same but
of course it's not because the the
colors that constitute the Hast stack
shift dramatically and that's what he
was investigating it's so interesting
because two paintings of the same
Haystack really at the micro level bear
nothing in common right there's nothing
and they're separate in time they're
separate in place the constituent
elements are completely different but
there's an emergent reality which is the
hyack that uni unifies all those
variants in form yes and makes the
perception possible now the post modern
claim is that there's no overarching
meta narrative it's like if there's no
overarching meta narrative you can't
even you can never perceive a Unity
right and they might say well there's a
limit to the manifestation of that Unity
right there's no ultimate unity it's
like oh yeah what fine draw the line
tell me tell me exactly where the unity
stops and then it's worse than that
because let's assume that they're right
that there is no uniting metan narrative
so no single proper way of looking at
the world right you can understand that
something might be said about that well
then it does that mean that the Ultimate
Reality is disunified that there are
various forms of fundamental truth and
if reality itself can't be unified
because it's not unified in its Essence
then are we destined to conflict between
our own motivations even and how do you
and I agree on anything if it if it
doesn't Point towards a Unity that's
actually apprehensible and in some way
implicit in the world this is why this a
huge huge problem this is why I was so
struck by what you were saying about
Fuko and and dared I think we can kind
of put Lan in here too because it
mirrors something that happen happen to
me at the end of writing this book I you
always come to a few surprises if you're
onto something in a good book and to me
the biggest surprise was that I
understood the postmodernists in a
completely new way and I understood them
actually as part of a tradition that
probably goes back to heraclitus
speaking ofs right but yes but also runs
through people like David Hume and even
Bishop Barkley who are reactive
to this objectivist idea yeah hume's
problem is you cannot compute a pathway
forward merely by understanding the
terrain right you can't get an ought
from an is and the whole the whole thing
is is inference essentially and he's
saying that the only thing that we have
in front of us is the fact that the sun
has always risen in our experience and
all recorded Human Experience and it's
only on that that we're able to base the
idea that the sun's going to rise
tomorrow which shatters this idea of
something that remains consistent from
from day to day and that's his scandal
of induction yes right that's the
problem the chicken has with the farmer
right exactly the farmer is the
chicken's best friend every day the
farmer brings food until it's
Thanksgiving uhuh in which case the
faith the chicken has in the structure
of the world as a consequence of
induction turns out to be painfully
wrong yeah and the problem is we never
know and Hume was pointing this to some
degree we never know when the rug is
going to be pulled out from underneath
us yes or at what level yes you know you
could even take the sun itself I've
thought it because you think well
there's nothing more consistent than the
sun like well until it emits a solar
flare that takes out our entire
electrical system which is a high
probability event right right in fact
there was a solar flare I think two days
ago that's on its way to Earth and no
one knows what the consequence of that
storm will be this is yeah yeah well so
it seems to me that in reality itself
there are something like levels of
predictability that that have something
to do with statistical regularity you
know the sun is a fairly predictable
entity because of its immense mass and
because of its immense mass and
size the Transformations that it un
undergoes can be predicted to some
degree at a statistical level reliably
but not entirely and I guess that's also
partly that turns us back to the reason
that we evolve Consciousness at all yes
if we could rely on induction there'd be
no reason for Consciousness
Consciousness seems to be the mechanism
that corrects for the fact that the
world is not fundamentally predictable
like seriously not fundamentally
predictable irrevocably yes now how do
you understand if at all and this is
where we start to wander onto the
dangerous quantum territory one of the
things that's really struck me and it's
maybe only an analogy is that the field
the too vaboh who or the TA that the
spirit of God that rests on the water
yes the that field that that that Spirit
interacts with seems to be something
like the pool of infinite possibility
like it's represented for example in the
Mesopotamian stories AB yes exactly as a
dragon right and a is an interesting
representation because a dragon is
something fearsome and predatory but
also something that contains the
possibility of treasure and so the
underlying metaphor there is that what
our Consciousness confronts is something
infinite in danger and possibility right
right which is seems perfectly
reasonable and that the proper stance to
adopt to that is one of something like a
heroic Endeavor towards fundamental
truth it's and that that's the best way
of contending with that and you see
Echoes of that in Genesis because God is
also periodically characterized as the
victor of the battle over Leviathan for
example which looks like an analog of
Tiamat right and so that's part of that
heroic
heroic interaction with reality that
characterizes well the logos the spirit
of the logos itself right the seething
ocean of okay so at the quantum level so
what what's been discovered right well
so this I like to approach this through
the debates that Neils bore used to have
with Albert Einstein so when quantum
mechanics was first making itself known
first and foremost to these very men
among others bore and Einstein were two
of the great architects of quantum along
with Lou de BR and and any number of Ian
Max plank we've already mentioned but
it's between Einstein and bour that this
fundamental irreducible tension emerges
in which bore sort of a Conan
philosopher says we're banging up here
against the inherently unknowable to the
human mind right these waves in that
describe probabilities this is froder
sort of and Heisenberg also kind of
managed to mathematically describe
probability waves which tell you where a
particle is likely to be but never where
it actually is not because we don't know
but because in some fundamental sense it
is isn't in any of those positions and
this is Bor I just right it's
possibility it is it is possibility and
and Heisenberg at one point wonderfully
Compares it to Aristotelian potentia
this ancient yes really oh yes he has to
potential yes oh that's so important to
Pure right and and so brings back this
old Aristotelian idea that the world is
made of potential and Ena and the
realization of of potential and so this
is the the Copenhagen interpretation
which basically say says there are no
holding places in your mind for that
which is fundamentally UNP perceived so
bore is saying of course all of our
measurements and observations are always
going to be expressed in terms of
classical mechanics because they're
going to be making contact with our
minds which are shaped like classical
mechanics in some way these these
categories like space and time location
and and position these are baked into
our minds this is where you get the cont
of it all and Einstein wonderfully says
if this is true then it's the end of
physics because to him physics means
deterministic yes and well and it also
means that
mathematics describes directly a reality
that is independent of us entirely and
that the world can be blanketed over
completely with these objective
mathematical terms that describe
whatever is most fundamentally real and
this dispute and its various tributaries
are are still going on today which is
one reason why this is such treacherous
territory to venture into because
there's always going to be an
alternative possible interpretation but
if you accept something like B's
interpretation which I believe Remains
the most philosophically coherent way of
dealing with these discoveries then what
you have is a situation very much like
what you're describing in Genesis now
that doesn't mean that the author of
Genesis was told by God about the
Schrodinger equations that's sort of
that would be the sort of pseudoscience
version of it but it does mean that the
pattern you're observing shot through
Genesis and as you indicate through the
whole Hebrew Bible of God's mind as the
resolver of in of a fundamentally
unresolved possibil cast her into order
or that's good or very good yes and the
idea of us as essentially that the image
of God in us is essentially yeah okay
well so so let me
let me extend that supposition for a
minute so there's a field of possibility
that lay in lays in front of you and it
in a way it surrounds and constitutes
all the objects so for example this is a
candle but not if I throw it at you okay
right right so there's a nonzero
possibility that one of the less
probable manifestations of this object
will occur yes okay so then you might
say well under what conditions does this
remain a candle okay well that's very
complicated yes because if I smash it
let's say on the edge here now it's a
knife
[Music]